Vmanomaly guide (#3834)
VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics: docs/guides/guide-vmanomaly-vmalert.md

# VmAnomaly Quickstart

### Prerequisites

> - In this tutorial it is assumed that you have VictoriaMetrics already, and you are familiar with VictoriaMetrics ecosystem:

Author: changed

  -  [victoriametrics](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/Single-server-VictoriaMetrics.html)
  -  [vmalert](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/vmalert.html)
  -  [vmagent](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/vmagent.html)

>   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  
  If you're unfamiliar with the listed components, please read [QuickStart](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/Quick-Start.html) first.
```

Author: added

> - It is assumed that you are familiar with Grafana and Docker

Reviewer: I think it is worth specifying the exact versions of Grafana and Docker.

Author: Added grafana, vmalert, vmagent and VictoriaMetrics versions. Does Docker version really matter

> ## What is VmAnomaly?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is vmanomaly?
```

We need to be consistent with components naming. When in doubt, check https://victoriametrics.com/

Author: writing everywhere in lower case as on  https://victoriametrics.com/
FYI  @dlazerka

> *VictoriaMetrics Anomaly Detection* is a service that continuously scans VictoriaMetrics time series and detects unexpected changes within data patterns in real-time. It does so by utilizing user-configurable machine learning models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*VictoriaMetrics Anomaly Detection* is a service that continuously scans time series stored in VictoriaMetrics and detects unexpected changes within data patterns in real-time. It does so by utilizing user-configurable machine learning models.
```

Reviewer: > machine learning models

Do we have a list of supported models? If yes, can we link them here?

Author: changed the sentence.
We have brief list on vmanomaly doc page, but there are no specifications given.
So the full list is yet to come and I will add it when it is ready.

> All the service parameters (model, schedule, input-output) are defined in a config file.

Reviewer: By this moment, the reader is unaware of the `schedule` or `input-output` concepts. So this sentence doesn't bring any additional knowledge to him/her

Author: deleted from here

> Single config file supports only one model, but it's totally OK to run multiple vmanomaly processes in parallel, each using its own config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single config file supports only one model. It is ok to run multiple vmanomaly processes, each using its own config.
```

Author: changed

> VmAnomaly periodically queries user-specified metrics, computes an **anomaly score** for them, based on how well they fit a predicted distribution, taking into account periodical data patterns with trends and/or seasonality, and pushes back the computed "anomaly score" to VictoriaMetrics. Then, users can enable alerting rules based on the "anomaly score" with VmAlert.

Reviewer: the sentence is too complicated. The long chain of actions is better to be described in separate sentences or via numerated list. The diagram would work as well.

Btw, what is `anomaly score`?

Reviewer: VmAlert => `vmalert`

would be great to link vmalert here to the `## What is VmAlert?` section

Author: > the sentence is too complicated. The long chain of actions is better to be described in separate sentences or via numerated list. The diagram would work as well.
> 
> Btw, what is `anomaly score`?

Rephased with bullet list

> VmAlert => `vmalert`
> 
> would be great to link vmalert here to the `## What is VmAlert?` section

Changed to lower case everywhere and added links

> ## What is VmAlert?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is vmalert?
```

> VMalert is an alerting tool for VictoriaMetrics. It executes a list of the given alerting or recording rules against configured `-datasource.url` compatible with Prometheus HTTP API.

Reviewer: I know this sentence is copied, and this is why it contains information that user won't need in this guide.
For example, `compatible with Prometheus HTTP API` is not needed here. It is important to be focused only on things that are relevant to the current guide and give only important information, to keep it simple.

Reviewer: This chapter is also missing a link to the vmalert docs for curious readers

Author: Changed, added link

> Alerting rules allow you to define alert conditions based on Prometheus expression language expressions and to send notifications about firing alerts to an external service. Whenever the alert expression results in one or more vector elements at a given point in time, the alert counts as active for these elements' label sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Alerting rules](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/vmalert.html#alerting-rules) allow you to define conditions that, when met, will notify the user. The alerting condition is defined in a form of a query expression via [MetricsQL query language](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/MetricsQL.html). For example, the expression `cpu_usage_percent > 90` will notify a user when the current CPU usage will exceed 90%.
```

Author: rephrased the sentence, but changed the example, as cpu_usage_percent is going to confuse a user.
`For example, in our case, the expression `anomaly_score > 1.0` will notify a user when the calculated anomaly score exceeds a threshold of 1. `

> ## How does VmAnomaly works with VmAlert?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How does vmanomaly works with vmalert?
```

> Compared to classical alerting rules, anomaly detection is more "hands-off" i.e. it allows users to avoid setting up manual alerting rules set up and catching anomalies that were not expected to happen. In other words, by setting up alerting rules, a user must know what to look for, ahead of time, while anomaly detection looks for any deviations from past behavior. In addition to that, setting up alerting rules manually has been proven to be tedious and error-prone, while anomaly detection can be easier to set up, and use the same model for different metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to classical alerting rules, anomaly detection is more "hands-off" and data-aware. Instead of thinking of critical conditions to define, user can rely on catching anomalies that were not expected to happen. In other words, by setting up alerting rules, a user must know what to look for, ahead of time, while anomaly detection looks for any deviations from past behavior. 
```

Practical use case is to put anomaly score generated by VmAnomaly into alerting rules with some threshold. Anomaly score is designed to fall between 0 and 1 if model consider that datapoint is following usual pattern, and if it exceeded 1 the datapoint is abnormal.

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### In this tutorial we are going to:
  - Configure docker-compose file with all needed services (VictoriaMetrics, VmAlert, VmAgent, Grafana, NodeExporter and VmAnomaly).
  - Explore configuration files for VmAnomaly and VmAlert.
  - Run our own VictoriaMetrics database with data scraped from NodeExporter.
  - Explore data for analysis in Grafana.
  - Explore VmAnomaly results.
  - Explore VmAlert alerts

> 
>  
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

_____________________________

## Data to analyze
Let's talk about data used for anomaly detection in this tutorial. 

> We are going to collect our own CPU usage data with node-exporter into the VictoriaMertics database.

Reviewer: please, be consistent with components name. It is either `node-exporter` or `Node exporter`.
Although, each time you mention some new component - please add a link to it.

Author: left "node-exporter" when it is used as a service, and "Node Exporter" when it is used as a Prometheus product

On a Node exporters' metrics page, part of the output looks like this:
```

> # HELP node_cpu_seconds_total Seconds the CPUs spent in each mode.

Reviewer: I think we won't lose anything if we make a shorter example. 5-7 time series is pretty enough to show the nature of data

node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="0",mode="irq"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="0",mode="nice"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="0",mode="softirq"} 1682.18
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="0",mode="steal"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="0",mode="system"} 995.37
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="0",mode="user"} 12378.05
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="idle"} 94386.53
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="iowait"} 51.22
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="irq"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="nice"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="softirq"} 39.18
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="steal"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="system"} 1378.79
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="1",mode="user"} 14241.59
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="idle"} 93929.1
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="iowait"} 50.93
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="irq"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="nice"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="softirq"} 30.41
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="steal"} 0
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="system"} 1368.52
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="2",mode="user"} 14722.17
node_cpu_seconds_total{cpu="3",mode="idle"} 93554.49
```

> Here, `node_cpu_seconds_total` metric tells us how many seconds each CPU spent doing each type of work: _user_, _system_, _iowait_, _idle_, _irq&softirq_, _guest_, or _steal_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, metric `node_cpu_seconds_total` tells us how many seconds each CPU spent in different modes: _user_, _system_, _iowait_, _idle_, _irq&softirq_, _guest_, or _steal_.
```

> These modes are mutually exclusive. A high _iowait_ means that you are disk or network bound, high user or system means that you are CPU bound.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These modes are mutually exclusive. A high _iowait_ means that you are disk or network bound, high _user_ or _system_ means that you are CPU bound.
```
please, keep formatting consistent.

> We'll send this node_exporter data into VictoriaMetrics later in this tutorial. But lets just note that `node_cpu_seconds_total` metric is a growing counter, so to calculate the per-second values we will use the rate function: `rate(node_cpu_seconds_total)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metric `node_cpu_seconds_total` is a [counter](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/keyConcepts.html#counter) type of metric. If we'd like to see how much time CPU spent in each of the nodes, we need to calculate the per-second values change via [rate function](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/MetricsQL.html#rate): `rate(node_cpu_seconds_total)`.
```

Here is how this query may look like in Grafana:

> ![node_cpu_rate_graph](guide-vmanomaly-node-cpu-rate-graph.png "node_cpu_rate_graph")

Reviewer: while the query is correct, the graph seems to show only partially available data. Is the gap between midnight and 11am expected?

Author: changed to screenshot with all data

> This query result will generate 8 data vectors per each cpu, and we will use them as an input for our VM Anomaly Detection. VmAnomaly will start learning configured model type separately for each of the data vectors.

Reviewer: it is better to stick to [time series ](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/keyConcepts.html#time-series)definiton instead of data vectors
you also have 18 series on the screenshot, not 8.

Author: 8 per each cpu label. So 40 in total.
Grafana just doesn't show all the labels.

______________________________

## VmAnomaly configuration and parameter description
Here is an example of the config file `vmanomaly_config.yml`.
```
scheduler:
  class: "scheduler.periodic.PeriodicScheduler"
  infer_every: "30s"
  fit_window: "2d"

model:
  class: "model.prophet.ProphetModel"
  interval_width: 0.8

reader:
  class: "reader.vm.VmReader"
  datasource_url: "http://victoriametrics:8428/"
  queries:
    node_cpu_rate: "rate(node_cpu_seconds_total)"

writer:
  class: "writer.vm.VmWriter"
  datasource_url: "http://victoriametrics:8428/"

```
**Parameter description**:

> There are 4 main sections in config file:

Reviewer: I think, we should start the paragraph with this section. Seems more natural to show a part of config and explain it immediately. Instead of showing the full config and explaining its parts later.

`scheduler` - defines how often to run and make inferences, as well as what timerange to use to train the model. 

`model` - specific model parameters and configurations, 

`reader` - where and how to read data from,

`writer` - where and how to write the generated output.

Let's look into parameters in each section:

* `scheduler` 

>     As we need to set an alert for it, we will use periodic "scheduler.periodic.PeriodicScheduler".

Reviewer: Are there any other classes?

Author: There is one-off class for one-time testing and tuning the model.

    
    * `fit_window` -  time frame of metric previously gathered, that you want to use for model training. 
    

>     Here it is the previous 2 days of data to put into the model training. You can choose other time granularity ('s' - seconds, 'm' - minutes, 'h' - hours, 'd' - days). Examples: 30s, 4m, 2h, 1d.

Reviewer: Are there any implications of choosing 30d instead of 1h? How should I pick the right config?

Reviewer: the same is for `infer_every`

Author: 30d is an example of formating.
rephased this one

    * `infer_every`- how often trained models will make inferences on new data. 
    
    You can look at this as how often a model will write its conclusions on newly added data. Here in example we are asking every 30 seconds: based on the previous data, do these new datapoints look abnormal? You can choose other time granularity ('s' - seconds, 'm' - minutes, 'h' - hours, 'd' - days). Examples: 30s, 4m, 2h, 1d.

* `model`
    * `class` - what model to run. You can use your own model or choose from built-in models: Seasonal Trend Decomposition, Facebook Prophet, ZScore, Rolling Quantile, Holt-Winters and ARIMA.
    
    Here we use Facebook Prophet with default parameters (`model.prophet.ProphetModel`). You can put parameters that are available in their [docs](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/quick_start.html).
    

>     Possible values: `anomaly_score`, `yhat`, `yhat_lower`, `yhat_upper`, `y`. You can choose all or some of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Possible values: `anomaly_score`, `yhat`, `yhat_lower`, `yhat_upper`, `y`. All values are optional.
```

  You can put several queries in a form:
  `<QUERY_ALIAS>: "QUERY"`. QUERY_ALIAS will be used as a `_key` label in generated metrics and anomaly scores.

* `writer`
    * `class` - defining where to write data. Here `"writer.vm.VmWriter"`
    * `datasource_url` - Output destination. An HTTP endpoint that serves `/api/v1/import`.

_____________________________________________
## VmAnomaly output
As the result of running VmAnomaly, it produces the following metrics:
- `anomaly_score` - the main one. Ideally, if it is between 0.0 and 1.0 it is considered to be a non-anomalous value. If it is greater than 1.0, it is considered an anomaly (but you can reconfigure that in alerting config, of course), 
- `yhat` - predicted expected value, 
- `yhat_lower` - predicted lower boundary, 
- `yhat_upper` - predicted upper boundary, 
- `y` - initial query result value.

Here is an example of how output metric will be written into VictoriaMetrics:
`anomaly_score{for="node_cpu_rate", cpu="0", instance="node_exporter:9100", job="node-exporter", mode="idle"} 0.85`

____________________________________________

> ## VmAlert congiguration

Reviewer 2: ## vmalert configuration

Here we provide an example of the config for VmAlert `vmalert_config.yml`.
```
groups:
- name: AnomalyExample
  rules:
  - alert: HighAnomalyScore
    expr: 'anomaly_score > 1.0'
    labels:
      severity: warning
    annotations:
      summary: Anomaly Score exceeded 1.0. `rate(node_cpu_seconds_total)` is showing abnormal behavior. 
```

In the query expression we need to put a condition on the generated anomaly scores. Usually if the anomaly score is between 0.0 and 1.0, the analyzed value is not abnormal. The more anomaly score exceeded 1 the more our model is sure that value is an anomaly.
You can choose your threshold value that you consider reasonable based on the anomaly score metric, generated by VmAnomaly. One of the best ways is to estimate it visually, by plotting the `anomaly_score` metric, along with predicted "expected" range of `yhat_lower` and `yhat_upper`. Later in this tutorial we will show an example
____________________________________________
## Docker Compose configuration
Now we are going to configure the `docker-compose.yml` file to run all needed services.
Here are all services we are going to run:

> ![Docker compose services](guide-vmanomaly-docker-compose.png "Docker compose services")

Reviewer 2: It's better to set the size for image by using html tags or reduce the size of images because they look huge on wide-angle screens

```
<p align="center">
  <img src="guide-vmanomaly-docker-compose.png" width="800" alt="Docker compose services">
</p>
```

Author: changed

* Grafana - visualization tool.
* Node exporter - Prometheus [Node Exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/) exposes a wide variety of hardware- and kernel-related metrics.
* VmAlert - VictoriaMetrics Alerting service.
* VmAnomaly - VictoriaMetrics Anomaly Detection service.

### Grafana setup
To anable VictoriaMetrics datasource as the default in Grafana we need to create a file `datasource.yml`
```
apiVersion: 1

datasources:
    - name: VictoriaMetrics
      type: prometheus
      access: proxy
      url: http://victoriametrics:8428
      isDefault: true

```
### Prometheus cofig
Lets create `prometheus.yml` file for `vmagent` configuration.
```
global:
  scrape_interval: 10s

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'vmagent'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['vmagent:8429']
  - job_name: 'vmalert'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['vmalert:8880']
  - job_name: 'victoriametrics'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['victoriametrics:8428']
  - job_name: 'node-exporter'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['node_exporter:9100']
  - job_name: 'vmanomaly'
    static_configs:
      - targets: [ 'vmanomaly:8500' ]

> ```

Reviewer 2: Better to add html div tags and code syntax highlighting for config examples - see
https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/blob/master/docs/guides/getting-started-with-vm-operator.md?plain=1#L23-L29 it will add copy button which is very useful for users.

Author: added div

      - "--remoteWrite.url=http://victoriametrics:8428/"
      - "--notifier.url=http://alertmanager:9093/"
      - "--rule=/etc/alerts/*.yml"
      # display source of alerts in grafana
      - "--external.url=http://127.0.0.1:3000" #grafana outside container
      # when copypaste the line be aware of '$$' for escaping in '$expr'
      - '--external.alert.source=explore?orgId=1&left=["now-1h","now","VictoriaMetrics",{"expr":{{$$expr|jsonEscape|queryEscape}} },{"mode":"Metrics"},{"ui":[true,true,true,"none"]}]'
    networks:
      - vm_net
    restart: always
  vmanomaly:
    container_name: vmanomaly
    image: us-docker.pkg.dev/victoriametrics-test/public/vmanomaly-trial:v1.1.0
    depends_on:
      - "victoriametrics"
    ports:
      - "8500:8500"
    networks:
      - vm_net
    restart: always
    volumes:
      - ./vmanomaly_config.yml:/config.yaml
    command: [ "/config.yaml" ]

  node_exporter:
    image: quay.io/prometheus/node-exporter:latest
    container_name: node_exporter
    ports:
      - 9100:9100
    pid: host
    restart: unless-stopped
    networks:
      - vm_net
    
volumes:
  vmagentdata: {}
  vmdata: {}
  grafanadata: {}
networks:
  vm_net:

> ```

Author: added div

Before running our docker-compose make sure that your directory contains all required files:
![All files](guide-vmanomaly-files.png "all files")

This docker-compose file will pull docker images,  set up each service and run them all together with the comand:
```
docker-compose up -d
```
_________________________________________________________________

> ## Model Results

Reviewer 2: `## Model results`

# vmanomaly Quickstart

**Prerequisites**
- In the tutorial, we'll be using the following VictoriaMetrics components:
  -  [VictoriaMetrics](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/Single-server-VictoriaMetrics.html) (v.1.83.1)
  -  [vmalert](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/vmalert.html) (v.1.83.1)
  -  [vmagent](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/vmagent.html) (v.1.83.1)
  
  If you're unfamiliar with the listed components, please read [QuickStart](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/Quick-Start.html) first.

> - It is assumed that you are familiar with [Grafana](https://grafana.com/)(v.9.3.1) and [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/).

Reviewer 2: - It is assumed that you are familiar with [Grafana](https://grafana.com/oss/) (v.9.3.1) , [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)

    Here is the previous 14 days of data to put into the model training. 

* `model`
    * `class` - what model to run. You can use your own model or choose from built-in models: Seasonal Trend Decomposition, Facebook Prophet, ZScore, Rolling Quantile, Holt-Winters and ARIMA.
    
    Here we use Facebook Prophet with default parameters (`model.prophet.ProphetModel`). You can put parameters that are available in their [docs](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/quick_start.html).
    
* `reader`
  * `datasource_url` - Data source. An HTTP endpoint that serves `/api/v1/query_range`.
  * `queries`: - MetricsQL (extension of PromQL) expressions,  where you want to find anomalies.

  You can put several queries in a form:
  `<QUERY_ALIAS>: "QUERY"`. QUERY_ALIAS will be used as a `for` label in generated metrics and anomaly scores.

* `writer`
    * `datasource_url` - Output destination. An HTTP endpoint that serves `/api/v1/import`.

Here is an example of the config file `vmanomaly_config.yml`.

<div class="with-copy" markdown="1">

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```yml

____________________________________________
## Docker Compose configuration
Now we are going to configure the `docker-compose.yml` file to run all needed services.
Here are all services we are going to run:

<p align="center">
  <img src="guide-vmanomaly-docker-compose.png" width="800" alt="Docker compose services">
</p>

* victoriametrics - VictoriaMetrics Time Series Database
* vmagent - is an agent which helps you collect metrics from various sources, relabel and filter the collected metrics and store them in VictoriaMetrics or any other storage systems via Prometheus remote_write protocol.
* [grafana](https://grafana.com/) - visualization tool.
* node-exporter - Prometheus [Node Exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/) exposes a wide variety of hardware- and kernel-related metrics.
* vmalert - VictoriaMetrics Alerting service.
* vmanomaly - VictoriaMetrics Anomaly Detection service.

### Grafana setup
To enable VictoriaMetrics datasource as the default in Grafana we need to create a file `datasource.yml`

<div class="with-copy" markdown="1">

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```yml

apiVersion: 1

datasources:
    - name: VictoriaMetrics
      type: prometheus
      access: proxy
      url: http://victoriametrics:8428
      isDefault: true

```

</div>

### Prometheus config
Let's create `prometheus.yml` file for `vmagent` configuration.

<div class="with-copy" markdown="1">

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```yml

global:
  scrape_interval: 10s

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'vmagent'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['vmagent:8429']
  - job_name: 'vmalert'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['vmalert:8880']
  - job_name: 'victoriametrics'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['victoriametrics:8428']
  - job_name: 'node-exporter'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['node-exporter:9100']
  - job_name: 'vmanomaly'
    static_configs:
      - targets: [ 'vmanomaly:8500' ]
```

</div>

### Docker-compose
Let's wrap it all up together into the `docker-compose.yml` file

<div class="with-copy" markdown="1">

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```yml

Author: added
